Hello and welcome to another episode of Twimble Talk, the podcast why interview interesting
people, doing interesting things in machine learning and artificial intelligence.
I'm your host Sam Charrington.
In today's episode we're joined by Nick Bostrom, professor in the Faculty of Philosophy at
the University of Oxford, where he also heads the Future of Humanity Institute, a multidisciplinary
institute focused on answering big picture questions for humanity with regards to AI
safety and ethics.
Nick is of course also the author of the book Super Intelligence, Paths Danger Strategies.
In our conversation we discussed the risks associated with artificial general intelligence
and the more advanced AI systems Nick refers to as super intelligence.
We also discussed Nick's writings on the topic of openness in AI development.
In particular the advantages and costs of opening closed development on the part of nations
and AI research organizations.
Finally, we take a look at what good safety precautions might look like and how we can create
an effective ethics framework for super intelligent systems.
Before we dive in, a final announcement for Wednesday's America's online meetup.
At 5pm Pacific time, David Clement will present the paper Deep Mimic, example guided deep
reinforcement learning of physics-based character skills by researchers from UC Berkeley, including
former guests Peter Rebeel and Sergei Levine.
For more info or to register, visit twimmelai.com slash meetup.
Okay, enjoy this show.
Alright everyone, I am on the line with Nick Bostrom.
Nick is professor in the faculty of philosophy at the University of Oxford, as well as being
director of the Future of Humanity Institute and director of the Governance of Artificial
Intelligence Program.
Nick, welcome to this weekend machine learning in AI.
Thanks for having me.
So Nick, from what I read, you had four undergraduate majors, eventually settling on physics and neuroscience
for your graduate work, and now you're a philosopher.
Can you start us off by telling us a little bit about your journey and your background
and what you're focused on nowadays?
Well, I studied a bunch of different things as an undergraduate that seemed to me to possibly
be useful for eventually trying to understand big important things.
I didn't know exactly which things were important to understand, but philosophy seemed to
be one area, physics, another neuroscience, and AI, also useful to have.
So I kind of just studied around a lot of different things to make a long story short.
The thing that I'm now running the Future of Humanity Institute is a multidisciplinary
research center at Oxford University.
We have people from a number of different disciplines, mainly mathematics and computer
science, but also some philosophers, political scientists, trying to think hard about big
picture questions for human civilization, things that could affect the trajectory of Earth
originating intelligent life, and AI has been a big focus, I'd almost say, obsession of
ours for a number of years now.
So we have both one group that is doing technical work on AI safety, AI alignment, and another
group that is looking at AI governance issues.
And did you study AI as part of your graduate work?
I did a little bit.
Yeah, this was back in the 90s, I took some AI courses back then, I then wrote a master's
thesis in computational neuroscience, and then I kind of drifted away from the field a
little bit, but came back to it as a focus area when I began working on my book, The Book
Superintelligence.
So this would have been maybe 10 years ago.
However, those are not familiar with the book, you know, what were the major themes in
superintelligence?
The book tries to think through what happens if AI succeeds one day at its original goal,
which has all along been to produce general intelligence in machine substrate, not just
to substitute for human cognition in specific tasks, but to figure out ways, I think, of achieving
the same powerful general learning ability, planning ability, reasoning ability that make
us humans unique.
So at least when I was beginning working on that book, there had been a surprisingly
small amount of attention paid to what would happen if the ultimate goal were achieved.
There's a lot of work trying to make AI slightly more capable, but a little thought to what
would happen if we achieved human level general artificial intelligence one day.
And I argued in the book that that probably would be followed within relatively short
order by superhuman levels of machine intelligence.
And I then, to bulk of the book, then it explores different scenarios and tries to introduce
different concepts and analytic tools that one can use to try to begin to think more
systematically about the issues that will arise in that kind of radically transformative
context.
Yeah, I'm wondering, do you consider yourself, or do you think of yourself as either pessimistic
or optimistic about this, the direction that AI is taking?
I'm full of both hopes and fears.
I think sometimes my public persona is often believed to be more on the negative side than
I actually am.
That is I'm actually very excited about the myriad beneficial applications both in the near
term and also over a longer period of time that one could hope to get from AI.
But I think because the book had a significant focus on what could go wrong if we failed
to get this transition to machine superintelligence right.
Because the book spent quite a number of pages trying to get the more granular understanding
of exactly where the pitfalls are there so that we could avoid them.
I think then, say, journalists often come to me to get the negative scoop and once
you're sort of in that pigeonhole, the journalist might ask you a bunch of questions.
You say, various things, some positive, some negative, they cut out all the positive
things you say.
And then you appear at saying this negative sound bite and then other journalists hear
that and it kind of gets self-reinforcing loop.
To answer your question, no, I wouldn't consider myself as either an optimist or pessimist
but I'm trying to just better understand what the spectrum of possibilities are and most
importantly how actions people take or can take here and now will affect likely long-term
outcomes for humanity.
When you think about the kind of spectrum of outcomes and the things that could go wrong,
then how do you categorize them?
Is there kind of a high-level categorization that you've developed of the different ways
that you think about the safety issues that we're trying to safeguard?
You can carve it up in different ways.
If you want a very high-level division, you could distinguish risks that come from the
AI itself, that is ways that AI could harm humans.
So there we have, in the context of machine super intelligence, the possibility of a failure
to solve the alignment problem, failure to get this hypothetical future super intelligent
system to do what we wanted to do.
We can go into that in more detail later if you want, but that's kind of one category
of risk.
Then another would be the risk that not that the AI would do something bad to humans but
that humans would use the AI to do bad things to other humans.
So use it on wisely, recklessly or maliciously.
The way we've used a lot of other technologies throughout human history, not just for beneficial
purposes, but to which war or to oppress one another.
Then I actually think there is a third category of concern, which has received a lot less
attention, but this would be risks of us humans doing bad things to the AI.
I think at some point these digital minds that we're building might come to process various
degrees of moral status, just like, say, many non-human animals have degrees of moral status.
And there is then a risk that we will maltreat, say, an AI system that is capable of some
form of sentience, more of the relevant interests, capable of suffering, at least if we draw
a logical scheme that should be in there as one category of potential harm that could occur.
It strikes me that in order to fully wrap our heads around this issue, it's fundamentally
a long-term, broad time horizon issue, there's a lot of the response that you see to these
issues being raised is that we're nowhere near AGI, we have no idea how we're going to
get there.
When you think about the timeframe or time horizon of your research, do you put a number
on that?
Do you have a sense as to what's the timeframe that we need to be worried about this kind
of thing?
There is a lot of uncertainty about the timeline, so in organizing one's thinking, it's
sometimes better not to do it with reference to, say, calendar years, but rather relative
to some set of capabilities, like if and when we reach this level of technical capability
than these social issues will arise.
I think a lot of the confusion and some of the controversy surrounding these questions
comes from completing two different contexts, the context of long-term, radically transformative
machine super-intelligence or human level intelligence on the one hand, and on the other hand,
the near-term context of what we can do now or will be able to do over the next few years
that will impact, say, national security or impact the economy.
And I think both of these contexts are important, are legitimate things to have conversations
about, but they are very different and why needs to keep them apart.
Otherwise, I think one simultaneously tends to over-hype the present and under-hype
the longer-term future.
And so is your research particularly focused on the longer term?
Yeah, that's what I'm most interested in, because I think ultimately that will matter
more and make a bigger difference in the world.
Do you work on both these near-term issues as well as the longer-term issues?
Well, a little bit on the near-term, but really our heart is in the longer term, trying
to figure out whether there are things at some point that might affect the trajectory
of human civilization, as opposed to just be bumps in the road.
I think it's also more neglected.
There are more groups interested in near-term issues, so our relative ability to add value
there is smaller than I think on the more neglected longer-term issues.
I'm curious what your experience is talking to folks about these longer-term issues.
Given the challenges that we have with things like global warming and humans impact on the
habitability of the Earth, which seems to be more present than AGI, how do you get people
to care, I guess, is the question?
There's been a huge amount of interest actually in our work in general, but on AGI in particular,
so maybe it's a pricing, but yeah, that hasn't been a problem.
I think the key challenge now is not so much to create a greater level of interest on
AGI and long-term AGI, but rather to try to channel the existing level of interest and
concern in constructive directions.
A lot of people have this general sense, well, AGI, maybe it could be really big, it could
be good or bad or scary, we don't even know how to think about it, so how do you take
that and then use that amount of activation energy to produce actually constructive work
in the world, let's say research that will give us better tools for scalable control
or advances in our ability to politically organize or to think of governance arrangements
that could result in a better outcome down the road.
I want to take a step back.
You mentioned that along this thinking about the timeline, that it's often better to
think about it in terms of capability, what are their specific pivot points or inflection
points in the capability timeline that are notable, you know, achieving AGI, I imagine
is one and achieving superintelligence is another, are there inflection points between where
we are today and AGI that you think are interesting milestones?
It's actually quite hard to think of what would be a reliable indicator that AGI is going
to happen, say, five years down the line and I think it's quite possible that it's
that what will happen is it will look like we're lost in a thick forest for some unknown
period of time and then maybe we stumble on a clearing and the finish line is just a
few words ahead of us.
That is, we shouldn't have a great deal of confidence in our ability to be able to see
a long time in advance that AGI will occur.
You know, there are some milestones that maybe if you had asked people 20 years ago, they
would have thought would be pretty impressive, say, the successes with AlphaGo.
Now that we passed them, I mean, there is a risk, I guess, of just kind of gradually
taking for granted things that really X and D were hugely impressive and at our expectation
level just adjusts so that there will be no point maybe at which we will be more shocked
and odd than we were with AlphaGo until we're all most all the way there and you already
have weak forms of AGI running around and doing and at that point it's kind of a little
bit late at the day.
It's the start thinking about the safety issues.
I think we want to use the time we have available now to put ourselves in the best possible
position for the coming transition to the era of machine superintelligence.
So you mentioned a big part of your work is trying to come up with these concrete strategies
or agendas that folks should be taking up.
What are some of those things that we should be doing to prepare?
Well, one is this research field of AI safety, which when the book was being written hardly
existed, there might have been 10 people in the world who were doing that and it was
very, very far from mainstream.
So now there is a research community working on this with groups in a number of different
places.
There is a group at Berkeley, some work in Montreal, we are doing a joint technical research
seminars with DeepMind, who also has an AI safety group, OpenAI, so it's kind of become
a small little research field in its own right, and that seems constructive and probably
there should be more of that kind of work.
Then I think we're still at an earlier stage with respect to the governance challenges.
Maybe we are with respect to the governance challenges where we were with respect to AI
safety work five years ago, like there is some sense that it's important that somebody
should work on it, but not yet a very clear conception about just what kind of work
would be helpful.
So maybe a few years down the road, we will have a clearer sense of what kind of work
on governance would be productive.
Well, the issue there is slightly different, the AI safety is a technical challenge, ultimately
the more people hammering away at it, the better, at worst they produce nothing and at
best they produce some insight that could actually be useful, when it comes to political
problems it's not always obvious that having more people work on it will produce a better
outcome or producing more insight or knowledge or shared understanding will always produce
a better outcome.
You also have to worry there about things like arms race dynamics and so forth.
So it gets more strategically complicated to figure out what would actually be a helpful
intervention when we are talking about things that are more in the political domain.
Maybe as an example of that you wrote a paper, I guess it was last year some time on the
implications of openness in AI development.
With the kind of cursory view of the paper it was, your results were a little bit counterintuitive.
Can you talk a little bit about that paper and kind of what led to it?
There is this widespread view that openness in AI development is a good thing.
Openness is almost one of these words that like freedom or democracy or fairness that
is kind of almost like just an applause like, right?
It sounds good, we should have more of it.
I think it's actually not that all obvious that ultimately that is what we want to have
more of with AI.
I think the short term impact of more openness or positive that is more people more quickly
get access to state of the art techniques and can use them more widely and I think on
balance that is positive.
But if we're thinking about this hypothetical future strategic context where we are getting
close to developing machine superintelligence and you think maybe there will be several groups
or countries or firms competing to try to get there first.
In that context openness could be extremely dangerous.
You would want, it seems to me, whoever develops superintelligence first to have the ability
at the end of that development process to pass for six months, let us say, or a year
to test their system very carefully, double check all their safety mechanisms, maybe to
slowly boost its intelligence through the human range and into the superintelligent range.
But if you have, say, 20 different research groups running neck to neck with almost
indistinguishable technology, then if any one of them decides to take it slow and be careful,
they'll just be surpassed by one of their competitors.
So it seems in an extreme race condition, the race would go to whoever takes the fewest
precautions and it's least cautious, that seems to be a risk-increasing situation.
So you'd be looking for ways to maybe increase the lead of whichever AI developer isn't
the lead at the time when you're getting close to superintelligence.
So that's the backdrop.
Think about what openness does, it kind of equalizes one variable that could cause dispersion
in AI capabilities.
So if you are open about the general science, well, then everyone has access to the same
general scientific ideas.
If you're open about your source code, let us say, then you equalize the software base
that different developers have, that would mean that any remaining dispersion would have
to come from, say, difference in hardware or different data sets or something like that.
It would one less source of dispersion and capability.
So that would tend to equalize the race, make it more tightly competitive and therefore
tend to reduce the lead time that the lead developer has in the end to go slow for the sake
of caution.
You are in this paper proposing that there are some costs to open this in that they accelerate
AI development and more specifically eliminate the opportunity to put in checks and balances
kind of in the end game.
I'm also wondering if there's a cost to lack of transparency or closeness that you factored
into the analysis that strikes me as mostly around the danger of not knowing where
AGI is, right, if AGI is much closer but it's closed and you don't see it and it's potentially
in a more advanced state in your competitors, how do you factor that into the analysis
here?
Well, so the full analysis, there are a number of other important considerations as well
besides the one I mentioned concerning the racing dynamic.
You might think about whether, say, an open development context tends to, say, attract
a different kind of participant, maybe with better motives than products done in secret.
But in terms of being able to know the capabilities even of different products, let's set aside
their actual algorithms or ideas but even just knowing how far along different product
is.
Not a simple model we have, this is in an earlier paper with a couple of colleagues of mine
called racing to the precipice.
You actually get the higher level of overall risk taking if competitors can see more precisely
how far along each other is.
The intuition being roughly that in this very simple gap theoretic model, if you have a
winner takes all dynamic, that if you see that you are behind, you sort of know for sure
that you will lose and you'd be willing to take any extra amount of risk, if that helps
you have at least some chance of catching up, whereas if you are unsure about your relative
position, then that would be a limit to the amount of risk you would take, because you might
be ahead and you wouldn't want to then take more risk just to get farther ahead.
If that then means you'd be likely to destroy the world if you succeeded.
Now one can construct different kinds of models of this type of situation and get different
outcome, but I think there are some general lessons that seem relatively robust.
So one is that the greater the degree to which there is a commonality of purpose between
different competitors, that is the greater the degree to which it wouldn't matter trying
a body who got the first, the more investment in safety you're likely to get.
In the limit where it's completely indifferent, who gets the first, then you don't have
a race.
You'd be quite happy to drop out of the race if that allows another competitor to spend
more time and be more cautious in the relevant stages.
So that fostering cooperation, fostering a kind of commitment to the common good would
seem to not just be good from a fairness point of view, making sure everybody gets the
slice of the upside, but also be good from an AI risk point of view in taking some of
the pressure of this possibility of a racing dynamic.
And it's not an all or nothing thing, but the more you can kind of ingrain early on
incredible commitment to use AI for the common good of all of humanity, rather than for
narrow, factional purposes to just enrich one company or strengthen the military of one
nation.
I think the more one can reduce this competition dynamic and obviate some of the problems associated
with that.
So does that present a paradigm of sorts in this particular research area that a more
collaborative environment reduces this competitive race, but also tends towards openness, which
increases the competitive nature of it or the risks associated with it?
Yeah, that could be some trade off there.
I think you might want to make a distinction between collaboration and cooperation.
So if collaboration means actively working together on one and the same product side
by side, that would be maybe one way of cooperating, but you could also imagine at least theoretically
the possibility of having entirely separate products that have no communication, but are
both committed to helping each other out or to sharing the spoils.
So that might be a highly operative development regime, but one that lacks actual active collaboration.
And what it seems that what you ultimately primarily want here is cooperation, and whether
that involves collaboration as well is a more tactical question of what seems feasible
at the given time.
But returning to the work in an AI safety, which is a bit further along, what would you
say are some of the interesting directions there and any early, noteworthy results that
folks have had?
Well, I think maybe it's obvious, but it took a little while for it to become kind of
common knowledge that the approach, or best illustrated by laws of robotics, the idea
that you would handcraft a few principles to guide what AI is allowed to do does not seem
to scale.
And therefore seems entirely unpromising as an approach to solving superintelligence
alignment.
And that what instead you'll need to do somehow is to leverage the intellectual capability
of these hypothetical future systems to help us solve the alignment problem, maybe by
having AI's that learn human preferences from human behavior or brain directing with
us.
Or that otherwise leverage their intelligence to help us figure out what it is that we
are trying to get them to do.
So now the question then becomes how can you actually do that?
And then there is a number of different ideas for how to go about researching that.
With different researchers having different judgments and intuitions about which of these
is more promising.
Some of these research avenues are more continuous with current research that is of interest
quite independently of any application in a future context of superintelligence.
So you have, say, inverse reinforcement learning and human preference modeling that
this is a few, even if what you're trying to do is to get like say a recommender system
to work better.
I see various customers have bought these different books and films and rated them thus what
other books and films are the most likely to use.
That is a simple example of how you try to build an AI system that can infer what humans
want.
But if you're trying to move that technology in a direction that could also work in this
context of superintelligence, then there are some distinct challenges that arise that
you could try to do work on.
But there is a bunch of other ideas as well of research that seems useful to give us
a better understanding of the possible safety challenges that could arise when you have
kind of superhuman systems that you need to control.
So just to give you one flavor of that, so one thing that a human level system could
do is to engage in strategic behavior.
It could like humans do it, can anticipate what other humans do, it could be deceptive.
A superintelligence system could do that presumably to superhuman degree of competence.
So once you have a sufficiently capable system, you might no longer be able to just assume
that you could easily test its capabilities.
It might kind of pretend to be less competent than it really is.
If it predicts that that will then result in a certain behavior on the part of the
programmer, sorry, it's human keepers, it might conceal its true goals if it perceives
that there is a strategic rationale for doing so.
So that kind of qualitatively different behavior that you wouldn't necessarily expect
to see in some human artificial intelligence systems.
Also when you have a superintelligence system, there might be a little part of the system,
some internal optimization process that might itself be highly capable and maybe smarter
than human.
And you need to think about whether there could be some agent processes emerging from
a larger system that you hadn't built in there by design.
So there are some ways in which the control problem looks qualitatively different when
one is thinking about the challenge of controlling a superintelligence, as opposed to the challenge
that we currently have of getting more limited AI systems to perform to expectation.
How as an AI safety researcher, how would you attack those types of problems in the absence
of the actual superintelligence?
What are some of the approaches folks are taking to kind of define and make progress in
these areas?
Well, so again, it comes down part of to taste the subjective judgment.
So you could, on the one hand, try to do more theoretical work, try to think through
more from first principles.
What are some of the issues that could arise with very powerful systems?
Or to a different personality, you might prefer to try to do things that kind of build on
existing techniques and develop them in a direction that could seem to be useful.
So a lot of these examples of the latter would be do all you, so say better techniques
for understanding what is going on inside a deep neural network, interpretability tools.
It seems like that would be useful, not just for making faster progress today, if you're
a researcher, like you want to see exactly what's going on in your network and why it's
doing what it's doing, but it also seems like that could lead into over time things that
would be useful for AI safety in the longer term, if you could kind of have better tools
for monitoring the cognitive processes occurring inside the system.
So there's like on one hand, you had these things like transparency, trying to better
understand adversarial examples and countermeasures to that, better ways of doing reinforcement
learning or imitation learning.
And on the other hand, these more kind of conceptual or purely mathematical studies of
hypothetical systems that we can't currently build, but that you can nevertheless reason
about a little bit like you would about some mathematical object that you can't actively
compute, but you could have some theoretical understanding about.
I guess I'm wondering how, you know, when we reason about these systems mathematically
in that way, is there a clear mapping from those more theoretical, from the work we're
doing today, theoretically, to, you know, what might need to be done far off in the future
in the case of these systems coming into existence, or is it, you know, more an issue of
hay work exploring these different areas, theoretically, and it's providing a foundation
for future iterations of work in the same area to build on each other with the hopes that
we keep pace with the advances that are happening on the AI side itself.
It's more the latter, so AI safety, I think, should still be regarded as a pre-powered
igmatic science that it's not clear what the best or most relevant way to address these
problem is.
It's not even generally agreed exactly what the problem is.
So you have different smart people trying out different things coming up with problem
formulations or concepts or sub-products that should be explored.
Some of them might turn out to be useful.
It's possible none of them would be really useful, but what would be useful is to have built
up a research community that is kind of continuously engaging with these questions and gradually
over the years refining their insights and having them kind of then being able to apply
that skill to the systems that are eventually built.
I think it's kind of the sense that this is important enough that we should try our best
to make progress on it.
And here are some cool ideas for how to make progress.
We don't yet know whether or not those will actually turn out to be useful.
Are there some things that folks that are working in the broader AI field should be thinking
about, meaning that folks that aren't working specifically in AI safety or AI governance
but are developing machine learning and AI systems today, how do you advise those folks
to contribute to this broader issue of AI safety without being fully dedicated to this
kind of research?
Well, I mean, it's like how you contribute to any cost in the world that you're interested
in.
You could try to work directly there.
Or you could try to support other people working there.
You could recommend to talented friends or young who wants to go into this to actually do
so.
You can donate money or give prestige by kind of legitimizing it and so forth.
Sure.
I guess I was wondering if there are like things that you wish every person working in
AI was thinking about or something like that.
It does seem to me that what would be quite robustly valuable across a wide range of
different scenarios is to have a more cooperative approach to AI to try to as far as possible
ingrained into the community, a commitment to the common goods principle that AI is super
intelligence.
If it actually were one day achieved should be for the benefit of all of humanity and
in the service of why they shared ethical ideals.
And I think the more that that kind of becomes embedded within the machine learning community,
the greater the chance that that will actually ultimately happen as well.
I think the research community has a non-trivial amount of power.
Certainly today, if you want to do cutting edge AI research, say your firm and you want
to be able to hire from the first tier of talent, it helps a lot if you can credibly claim
that you're going to use this for ethical acceptable purposes.
If you want to do something nasty, like figure out a better way to generate spam or something
like that, or do some kind of highly unpolitable military application, chances are you're going
to have a much harder time to recruit the best.
You might have to go to the second or third tier talent.
So this kind of big commitment to idealism and cosmopolitan values, I think could exert
some shaping influence over how AI is developed and used.
And so I think anybody in the community can do their part to strengthen that.
And I think that cumulative, it could be quite valuable.
There is a sort of a more esoteric issue as well, which relates to this idea of digital
minds again, but as our AI systems become more and more complex and capable, and at some
point maybe have the same behavioral repertoire of capabilities as animals, like a mouse say
or a dog.
At that point, I think the question of the moral status of these digital minds becomes
increasingly relevant.
And it's a hard thing to discuss.
It still feels a little bit like one of those silly things that is kind of, you know,
you can't say with a strange face, but that's where AI safety was five years ago.
It was also this fringe thing that a few people on the internet talked about.
And you couldn't really, and to some extent, these current conversations about AI governance
and the wider impact of society, that's also been moving from a fringe science fiction
saying people on the internet to something that people who think of themselves as serious
people now acknowledge as a legitimate thing to work on.
And I think that the moral status of digital minds needs to start making this migration
as well, from suitable topic for the philosophy seminar room into the kind of thing that you
can talk about in some mainstream forum with different views on it, but without it being
a silly thing or something that you kind of snicker about.
And again, yeah, you can contribute to that by just not being afraid of talking about
that if the topic comes up with your friends or colleagues.
One of the interesting things that I came across in some of your writing was this notion
of how ethics itself is this dynamic force over time, this dynamic picture over time.
And we need to, I forget the specific construct, but it was part of the way we approach AI safety
is to build in some notion of ethics.
It's almost like we need to go back in time to being in, you know, ancient Greece or something
like that and trying to build a system that could map itself from that, you know, ethical
system to our current ethical system, which is, you know, pretty dramatically different.
And that's kind of the way we need to think about building a system today.
Can you kind of elaborate on that?
Did I give you enough to spark some recognition, which we're actually saying?
Yeah, so I think it would be a mistake if one thinks about how one would use super
intelligence to try to list all our current object level ideas and conceptures and moral
principles, then sort of try to hardwire those into the AI to then forever characterize
how the future should pan out.
We should recognize that just as every other earlier age that we can now look back on by
our lives were severely misguided, had huge moral blind spots in terms of, I don't know,
you could go through the list, like slavery, status of women, how it did, animals, social
inequalities, causes for war, that presumably we have now not yet attained full moral
enlightenment.
And it's quite likely that if there are leader stages of human history that looks back
on 2018, they might also shudder to think about the atrocities that we were committing
right now.
And so we want to leave open the possibility for moral growth.
And not just moral growth narrowly conceived, but for in general, there to be development
in how we think about human values and what life can involve and how we can organize society.
And so that one perhaps attractive vision for how super intelligence would be used would
be to enable a deeper deliberation on the part of humanity informed, say by super intelligent
advice, and maybe AI could help us increase human intelligence and safeguard us while
we were doing this.
But some kind of deliberative process that could plunder these things for a long time before
we made any irrevocable decisions about exactly what kind of post human future we would want
to create and move into.
To kind of summarize, it's tempting for us to say, hey, in order to ensure the ethical
behavior of these systems, let's bake in our ethics.
But in the future, our ethics will undoubtedly be proven to be inferior.
And so we need to navigate, build almost an ethical calculus, maybe, and build systems
that can navigate kind of changing ethical standards.
Well, okay, yeah, so I don't think an ethical calculus in the sense that we would lay down some
moral axioms and then the AI would compute things from those.
But more that there is some process whereby we do moral thinking or in general do thinking
about what we want in life.
And if the AI could learn to do that same kind of thinking or to maybe learn to extrapolate
our thinking, that might be one way of getting indirectly at this thing that we really want,
as opposed to the thing we would say we want if we had to make up some answer of the
cuff.
So I think you're right for two reasons.
One is that you wouldn't want to just call in our current misconceptions and superficial
misunderstandings.
You would want this possibility of learning and developing and doing something better
that we could do at the spur of the moment.
Also, I think this harkens back to the earlier idea of a commitment to the common good,
but the more you can conceive of this as a very inclusive process, we're not just one
person or one country, so one country's values would achieve total dominance, but something
that could incorporate many different interests, many different value perspectives.
Maybe not an absolute degree, but a widely generous and inclusive degree.
I think that would also make it possible to conceive of a future that is more widely
appealing and that would reduce some of these incentives to race to the precipice that
would arise if every participant in the development process were just have been done in pulsing
their own idiosyncratic views on the entire future.
So I think that two reasons for doing it more indirectly and in this more inclusive way
to the extent that it's possible.
And that, again, I think is something that anybody who's a member of this community in small
ways, not so much in the specific work that do day-to-day, but in terms of being ethical
members of this community that can sometimes talk about and express views about how their
little contributions should be used and the overall purpose for which this technology
should be developed, where there's space for a lot of voices to cumulatively make a
big difference.
For folks that have listened to our conversation and want to learn more or dig deeper or begin
to even contribute or support some of the work happening in this area, what are good
places to start in terms of resources or organizations to follow?
Well, I have maybe an obvious bias.
The book that we talked about earlier is like maybe best expresses my perspective on
this, but there is a kind of overlapping set of communities that are interested in this.
So one, quite interesting one is the effective altruism community that is concerned about
the wider range of cost areas, but AI also increasing being one of them.
It's a community of people who are trying to take care of how you can have the greatest
possible positive impact on the world in terms of what you do with your career or in terms
of where you donate your charitable giving.
So checking out their resources, they have a career guide, they have various blogs, we
want a good place to start.
If you want to do technical AI safety, then you can Google technical AI research agendas
and you'll find different ideas, or you can see some of the latest publications coming
out from deep-bind AI safety or open AI or FHI or MIRI, or the group at Berksey, to see
kind of concrete examples, so I kind of think people are working on.
Well, Nick, thank you so much for taking the time to chat with me.
Is there anything else that you'd like to leave folks with?
Now, I think the bottom line is, we don't know how long it'll take, but if we ever do get
to create super intelligence, it's such a big thing that our bottom line must be the
sense of enormous humility that we are just in way over our heads, but we have no choice
to make our best effort to get through this somehow in a responsible, wise and generous
way.
You're great.
Thank you.
All right, everyone, that's our show for today.
For more information on Nick or any of the topics covered in this episode, visit twimmelai.com
slash talk slash 181.
If you're a fan of this podcast, we'd like to encourage you to visit your Apple or
Google podcast app and leave us a five-star rating and review.
Your reviews help inspire us to create more and better content, and they help new listeners
find the show.
As always, thanks so much for listening and catch you next time.